---
title: Understanding the Link between Natural Disasters, Socioeconomic Factors, and Human Impacts
date: 2023-04-08 12:00:00 -5000
categories: [linkbetweenfactors, sub_linkbetweenfactors]
tags: [linkbetweenfactors]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
---

# A Closer Look at impacts of Droughts and Heatwaves

As introduced in previos post, the focus of this analysis will be on the following two natural disasters: droughts and heatwaves. In this post, we will explore how these disasters has an affect on GDP, income, the total number of affected people and many more. By examining these relationships, we hope to gain valuable insights into the broader implications for communities and develop a better understanding of the complex interplay between natural disasters and socioeconomic contexts.

Natural disasters tend to magnify existing inequalities, disproportionately affecting nations with limited economic resources. Countries grappling with poverty, inadequate infrastructure, and scarce resources face an uphill battle when addressing the effects of these disasters.

To shed light on this, we will utilize scatter plots to visually represent the relationship between the magnitude these factors. Therefore, in the following post, we will analyze and interpret the collected data through scatter plots and perform a cluster analysis to identify potential patterns and relationships. The findings from this study will contribute to the ongoing discourse on climate change, natural disasters, and socioeconomic factors, ultimately fostering more resilient communities worldwide and supporting informed decision-making.

# Exploring the Connections: Analyzing the Data and Identifying Patterns through scatter plots 
Now that we have discussed the broader implications of natural disasters and their impact on socioeconomic factors, it is time to delve deeper into the data and uncover meaningful insights. In this section, we will analyze the collected information through the use of scatter plots.

{% include scatter_plot_gdpvstotal.html %}

The above scatter plot illustrates the relationship between GDP per capita and the total number of affected individuals, normalized for comparison purposes (log to log). It provides valuable insights into the relationship between GDP per capita and the total number of affected individuals. By examining the distribution of data points, distinct clusters emerge, revealing significant patterns and regional variations.

One notable cluster that emerges from the plot is situated in the corner characterized by the lowest GDP per capita and the highest number of affected individuals. Within this cluster, a predominant representation of African countries can be observed. This clustering suggests that nations in this region, grappling with limited economic resources, face significant challenges when dealing with the impacts of natural disasters. The concentration of data points in this cluster emphasizes the existing vulnerabilities and socio-economic disparities faced by these African countries.

Conversely, another distinct cluster becomes evident in the region characterized by high GDP per capita and a low number of affected individuals. This cluster is predominantly occupied by countries from Northern America, Europe, and Australia. The concentration of data points in this cluster highlights the relatively higher resilience and capacity of these nations to mitigate the impacts of natural disasters due to their stronger economic conditions, robust infrastructure, and better access to resources.

It is worth noting that the data points representing Asian countries are dispersed across the scatter plot, indicating a wide range of economic situations within the region. The scattered distribution suggests significant variations in GDP per capita and the number of affected individuals among Asian countries. This finding underscores the diverse socio-economic landscape in Asia, with some countries exhibiting high economic development and resilience, while others face greater vulnerability to natural disasters due to limited resources and infrastructure.

Overall, this scatter plot analysis underscores the intricate interplay between GDP per capita, the total number of affected individuals, and regional disparities in the context of natural disasters. It highlights the disparities in resilience and the need for targeted interventions to support regions with lower GDP per capita and higher vulnerability. 

In addition to exploring the relationship between GDP per capita and the total number of affected individuals, we further investigate the connections by examining the relationship between annual freshwater withdrawal and the total number of affected individuals. The scatter plot below provides a visual representation of this relationship.

{% include scatter_plot_freshTotal.html %}

In the left corner of the plot, we observe a cluster of data points representing African countries. These countries exhibit relatively low levels of annual freshwater withdrawal and are situated in a region where the total number of affected individuals is the highest. This finding suggests that inadequate access to freshwater resources in these African nations contributes to their vulnerability and susceptibility to the impacts of natural disasters. Insufficient freshwater availability can exacerbate the challenges faced by these countries in managing and recovering from such events.

On the other corner of the scatter plot, we find a cluster consisting of Northern American countries, certain Asian countries, and some European nations. This cluster represents regions with relatively higher levels of annual freshwater withdrawal and a lower number of affected individuals. The presence of these data points in this region signifies a greater ability to cope with natural disasters due to better access to freshwater resources. Northern America, with its advanced infrastructure and water management systems, along with certain economically developed Asian and European countries, demonstrate a higher capacity to mitigate the impacts of natural disasters through effective freshwater management strategies.

Situated between the African cluster and the cluster of Northern American, Asian, and European countries lies a mixed group of data points representing several European nations. This middle region reflects varying levels of annual freshwater withdrawal and corresponding impacts on affected populations. It suggests that within Europe, there are disparities in freshwater availability and resilience to natural disasters, with some countries demonstrating better resource management practices and more effective disaster preparedness.

# Introduction to Cluster Analysis: Exploring the Interplay of Socioeconomic Factors and Natural Disasters

As seen in the above section, there are relationsip between factors that are meaningful. In this section, we will delve into a comprehensive cluster analysis to uncover patterns and relationships among various socioeconomic factors and their association with natural disasters. The analysis will be based on multiple variables, including GDP, Cereal Yields, Annual Freshwater Withdrawal, Agricultural Land, Income, Disaster Subtype, Total Affected, and Population. By examining the relationships between these factors, we aim to gain deeper insights into the complex interplay between socioeconomic contexts and the impacts of natural disasters: drought and heatwave.

{% include cluster_visualization.html %}

## Cluster 0
Cluster 0 represents a group of countries with relatively lower levels of economic development. The average GDP per capita in this cluster is around $2,830, indicating a moderate level of economic development. Agricultural productivity, measured by the average cereal yield, is also moderate, with a value of approximately 2,264.

In terms of economic indicators, the average GDP absolute value is around $204 billion, with the agricultural sector contributing around 15% to the GDP. The countries in this cluster have a moderate level of international trade, with an average percentage of GDP from exports of approximately 31%. The industrial sector contributes around 27% to the GDP. However, these countries show a significant reliance on imported goods and services, as the average percentage of imports to GDP is approximately 37%.

In terms of environmental factors, the countries in Cluster 0 have a moderate level of water usage for agricultural and industrial purposes, with an average annual freshwater withdrawal of around 22%. Agricultural land comprises approximately 39% of the total land area, and arable land represents around 13% of this.

Income inequality is relatively high within this cluster. The top 20% of the population earns approximately 51% of the total income, while the lowest 20% earns only around 5% of the total income.

In terms of disaster impact, the most common disaster is drought with an average of around 1.8 million people affected by this disaster. When normalized by population, the average total affected ratio is approximately 0.07, indicating a relatively high impact of disasters on the population. The average population size within this cluster is around 44.9 million.

The countries in Cluster 0 include Mauritania, Kenya, Vietnam, Burkina Faso, Brazil, Paraguay, Uganda, Bolivia, Georgia, Uzbekistan, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, El Salvador, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia, Honduras, Niger, Mali, Mozambique, Thailand, Ecuador, Kyrgyz Republic, Senegal, Tanzania, Guatemala, Ethiopia, Gambia, Namibia, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Eswatini, Zimbabwe, and Argentina.


## Cluster 1
Cluster 1 represents a group of countries with higher levels of economic development and agricultural productivity. The average GDP per capita in this cluster is $29,145.50, indicating a relatively higher standard of living compared to other clusters. These countries also have a higher average cereal yield of 4,967.77, suggesting a greater efficiency in agricultural production.

In terms of economic indicators, the average GDP absolute value in cluster 1 is $2.637 trillion, highlighting the overall size of the economies within this cluster. However, the agricultural sector's contribution to the GDP is relatively low, with an average of 4.28%. On the other hand, the average percentage of GDP from exports is 33.70%, indicating active participation in international trade. The industrial sector also plays a significant role, contributing an average of 23.13% to the GDP.

Socioeconomically, the countries in cluster 1 have a relatively high import-to-GDP ratio of 36.89%, indicating a significant reliance on imported goods and services. The annual freshwater withdrawal per capita is approximately 90.43 cubic meters, suggesting a higher demand for water resources in these countries. Agricultural land accounts for an average of 47.74% of the total land area, with arable land comprising 25.01% of this.

In terms of income distribution, there is a certain level of income inequality within cluster 1. The top 20% of the population earns an average income share of 41.31%, while the lowest 20% earns 7.32%. This indicates a concentration of wealth among the top earners in these countries.

When it comes to natural disasters, cluster 1 countries have primarily experienced heat waves and droughts. The total number of people affected is relatively low, with an average of 15,042.04 individuals. And, when normalized by population, the average total affected ratio stands at 0.0019, suggesting a minor impact relative to the population size.

The countries within cluster 1 encompass a diverse range of nations, including Australia, Egypt, Spain, Pakistan, Italy, the United States, Greece, Moldova, Austria, Belgium, Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Luxembourg, Portugal, the Netherlands, Romania, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Hungary, the Slovak Republic, Turkey, Japan, Canada, and Uruguay.


## Cluster 2
Cluster 2 represents countries with distinct characteristics compared to other clusters. The average GDP per capita in this cluster is $8,190.45, indicating a lower level of economic development compared to Cluster 1. The average cereal yield is 2,382.11, suggesting lower agricultural productivity compared to Cluster 1.

The average GDP absolute in Cluster 2 is $354.993 billion, highlighting the overall size of the economies within this cluster. The agricultural sector contributes relatively more to the GDP, with an average of 13.69%, while the GDP from exports is lower, averaging 27.45%. The industrial sector contributes an average of 22.94% to the GDP.

Socioeconomic indicators show that countries in Cluster 2 have a higher import-to-GDP ratio of 45.26%, indicating a relatively higher dependency on imports compared to Cluster 1. The annual freshwater withdrawal per capita is approximately 786.47 cubic meters, suggesting a higher demand for water resources in these countries. Agricultural land accounts for an average of 38.14% of the total land area, with arable land comprising 15.78%.

In terms of income distribution, the top 20% of the population in Cluster 2 earns an average income share of 54%, while the lowest 20% earns 8.58%. This indicates a certain level of income inequality within these countries, with a significant concentration of wealth among the top earners.

Cluster 2 is characterized by countries that have experienced primarily both drough and heat waves. With a relatively higher number of people affected, averaging 61,750.34 individuals. When normalized by population, the average total affected ratio stands at 0.0084, indicating a moderate impact relative to the population size.

The countries in Cluster 2 include Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Ecuador, India, Indonesia, Iran, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru, the Philippines, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Thailand, Ukraine, Venezuela, and Vietnam.





